(upbeat music)
- Hello everyone out there in the live stream.
Thanks for watching live.
Hopefully you can participate
and give us some questions and feedback and whatnot.
And yeah, we're ready to get started.
Min, you ready?
- Yep.
- All right.
Min, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thanks.
- Yeah, it's really good to have you here.
I'm excited to talk about building applications with zeroMQ.
It's definitely one of those topics
that I think lives in this realm of asynchronous programming
in ways that I think a lot of people
don't initially think of.
Like you think of async programming,
like, okay, well, I'm gonna do threads
and if threads don't work, maybe I'll do multiprocessing
and then those are my options, right?
But queues and other types of intermediaries
are really interesting for creating powerful design patterns
that let you scale your apps
and do all sorts of interesting things, right?
- Yeah, yeah, zeroMQ has definitely given me
a new way of thinking about how different components
of a distributed application can talk to each other.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So we're gonna dive all into that,
which is gonna be super fun.
But before we do, maybe just tell us a bit about yourself.
How did you get started in programming in Python?
- Yeah, so I got started mostly during college
where I was studying physics
and what essentially amounted
to a computational physics degree.
And that's where I met, I had a professor, Brian Granger,
who's one of the heads of the Now Jupyter Project.
I started working with him as an undergrad back in 2006,
working on what would ultimately become
the first IPython parallel,
so interactive parallel computing toolkit in IPython
that would eventually-- - Oh, that's really cool.
What university was that at?
- That was at Santa Clara University.
- Uh-huh, okay, nice.
Yeah, it's really cool.
So you were working on physics,
but you were also at the heart of Jupyter,
and I guess IPython at the time, right?
IPython Notebooks is what they were called, yeah?
- Yeah, coming up on 15 years
that I've been working on IPython and Jupyter.
- Yeah, nice.
And so you basically, did you do programming
before you got into your physics,
or did you just learn that to get going with your degree?
- Just for, so I did it for fun in college,
but I played around with calculators and stuff
in high school, but nothing-- - Right, right, right, right.
- Nothing more complicated
than printing out a Fibonacci sequence.
- Nice, so were you a TI person?
Were you an HP person?
What kind of world were you--
- Yeah, TI, TI all the way.
- Yeah, me too, obviously.
That reverse Polish notation, that was just wrong.
- Yeah, although I did, in college,
we did implement reverse Polish calculators
'cause it's easier.
- Yeah, yeah, cool.
- It's easier to write a parser for that.
- Yeah, it's easier on the creator
and not on the user, which-- - Yeah, exactly.
- I feel like computers used to be way more that way, right?
Like, oh, it's easier for us to make it,
well, if you put a little more work,
it'd be easier for the millions of people that use it.
Well, maybe not millions in the early, early days,
but yeah, very interesting.
So what kind of stuff were you doing
with IPython in the early days?
What kind of stuff were you studying with your physics?
- So in grad school, I was studying
computational plasma physics simulation,
so it was particle simulations of plasmas,
which are what's going on in stars.
I wasn't studying stars, but that's one of the main plasmas
that people know about.
And so I was doing particle simulations
of just studying a system, seeing what happens.
And we were working on an interactive scale simulation code
that was written in C++.
It was a fairly nice and welcoming
C++ physics simulation as far as
academic C++ physics simulations go.
But essentially, my first year of grad school,
I wrote a paper where I had to do
a simulation run for five days,
look at the results, and then change some input parameters
and run it again for five days,
and do that for a few dozen iterations,
and then wrote a paper about that.
And then ultimately, my PhD thesis
was about wrapping the same code in Python
so that I could have programmatic self-steering,
actually by this time, driven in a notebook,
doing what had been manual, like change it, run it again,
doing that automatically,
just by wrapping the C++ code in a Python API,
I could do it much more efficiently
and actually take something that took
multiple iterations of five days,
I could actually get the same result
in a little over half a day, I think.
- Wow, that's really cool.
So you would run basically a little small simulation
with C, and then you would get the inputs in Python
and go, okay, well, now how do we adjust it?
How do we change that?
- Yeah, it was actually the same simulation,
but I had to tune the inputs a little bit differently
in order to, there were some details of the physics
that basically I had to turn some knobs way up
because I wasn't constantly watching it.
And I would say, oh, that number was too big.
Turn it down, do it again,
and then look and see if it was too big again.
Whereas once I had a knob that could be turned
while the simulation was running,
which is the feature that was missing,
I could say ramp up the current in this case.
So I was studying the limit of current
that you can get through a diode.
- Right.
- And so ramp up the current,
and then once I see evidence that it's too high,
ramp it back down, and then I could change,
lower the slope so that I would slowly approach
an equilibrium and find the limit.
Whereas when I had to do it with this long,
I had to basically wait until it's done
to change the input.
I had to dramatically over-inject the current,
which made the simulations extra slow
because there were way too many particles.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And the spatial resolution had to be really fine
in order to resolve something called a virtual cathode.
And I didn't have to do nearly as much.
Basically, because I could do this live feedback,
the simulations themselves could be quicker
because I didn't have to provide enough information
that I could get the right answer out a long time later.
- Oh, that's super cool,
and obviously it makes a huge difference.
I feel like we have a similar background
in how we got into programming.
I was doing a math degree,
and my math research led me into doing C++
on Silicon Graphics mainframe computers
and stuff like that.
And you talk about letting these things run overnight.
Everyone would just kick off these things,
and then they would come back in the morning
to see what happened.
And interesting sort of random sidebars.
We came in one morning,
and we all tried to log into our little workstations
or whatever, and the system just wouldn't respond.
There was just something wrong with it.
And we were like, "Well, what the heck is going on?
"This is a quarter million dollar computer.
"It should let us log in.
"What is wrong with it?"
And it was in there running really loud.
It was like this huge, loud machine.
And it turned out that one of the grad students, not me,
had started a job that was,
they were trying to figure out what was going on,
and they were logging a lot
'cause they were having problems with their code.
And it was in this tight loop that ran all night.
And because it was like a somewhat small group,
they had no disk limits or permission restrictions
for the large part.
So it literally used up every byte on the server,
and then it just wouldn't do anything at all.
(laughs)
And I mean, the reason I bring this up
is that's the challenge of these things
where you start it and let it run for days,
and then figure out what's happening.
You're like, "Oh, it just used up the entire hard drive
"of this giant machine.
"Whoops, it broke it for everyone."
And so this live aspect or more self-guided
is a really great idea.
It's really, it's a big step ahead.
Maybe more so than people initially hear it as.
It's a big deal.
- Yeah, and I think it was,
that's part of what got me really excited
about the programmatic,
giving, when you have access to something in Python,
and you have an environment like IPython or Jupyter
or whatever, being able to interact with something,
what is usually, what you might think of
as an offline physics simulation
that runs for hours or days.
If you have a Python API to it,
you can steer it while it's going.
You can turn the knobs on your experiment
while it's running.
Sometimes there are reasons why
that's not actually a good idea,
but it's really powerful to not,
one of the costs that I had in my experiment
was that in order to change the inputs,
I had to start over.
Physically, I didn't have to.
If it were a physical machine
where I were measuring inputs and outputs,
I could just turn the curve down
and see the results,
but the code didn't support that.
Whereas with this,
and the frustrating thing about it
was the way the physics was written did support that.
The C++ code did support that.
We just hadn't written an interface
that allowed me as the user to do it.
And so the Python wrapping work was surprisingly little.
It was expose Python APIs to,
or C++ APIs to Python with Cython.
- Yeah, yeah.
- I could turn all the knobs
that were already there in the code.
I just was now allowed to turn them.
- It sounds to me, thinking back on the timeline there,
that must have been pretty early days
in the data science, computational science
world of Python, right?
Like NumPy was probably just about out around then?
Or what was that?
- Well, by the time I was doing that work,
that would have been around 2012.
- Oh, okay, so yeah,
it was more established at that point.
I was thinking back to early,
like 2005 or something.
Yeah, not quite, right?
- Yeah, not quite.
That was when I was still, as a little undergrad,
was still able to help make building NumPy.
I was able to submit patches
to make building NumPy on Mac a little easier.
- That's cool.
Before it became completely polished
and so widely used.
I suspect it's really nerve-wracking
to contribute to those kinds of things now.
- Yeah, it was pretty exciting.
But it was a nice community
and it was exciting to be able to say,
I have a problem.
There's probably other people who have a similar problem.
Let me see if I can fix it and then submit a patch.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
Cool, so you're carrying on
with your scientific computation work these days, right?
What do you do now?
- Well, so now my job is actually working on Jupyter
and my Python-related stuff.
So I am a senior research engineer
at Simula Research Lab in Oslo, Norway.
Where I've been since 2015.
And I'm the head of the department
of scientific computing and numerical analysis.
So I'm in a department
where people are doing physical simulations of the brain
and studying PEs and things like that.
But what I do is I work on JupyterHub.
- Yeah, cool.
- So we made JupyterHub as a tool for deploying
while I was still at Berkeley.
We made it as a tool for deploying
for people who want to deploy Jupyter notebooks.
We say it's for if you're a person who has computers
and you have some humans and you wanna help those humans
use those computers with Jupyter.
That's what JupyterHub is for.
And so that initially was scoped
to be an extremely small project
because we didn't have any maintenance burden to spare.
The target of that was research groups like mine
in grad school of a few people, maybe small classes
who have one server in their office
and they just wanna make it easier for people to log in
and use Jupyter on there.
This is when people-- - Right, right.
- People had all their SSH tunnel,
reverse SSH to my server with the open or reverse tunnel
so I can point localhost and it's actually over there.
So we were trying to make life easier for those folks.
But then-- - Yeah, 'cause they were
running the servers locally and they're like,
how do I get access to my computation over there
but on my machine, that kind of stuff, right?
- Yeah, it's like if I'm a person
who's already comfortable with Jupyter
but now I have access to a computer that's over there,
how do I run my notebook stuff over there?
And there were a few solutions to that
with involving SSH tunnels or whatever.
And JupyterHub was aimed at those folks.
But it turned out that's not the user community
that's really been the most excited about it
with things like Sierra to JupyterHub,
the JupyterHub on Kubernetes started by EeveePanda
and now led by a whole bunch of wonderful folks.
We're shifted into a larger scale
than initially designed for.
- Yeah, it definitely seems like JupyterLab
and the predecessors to it have really probably exploded
beyond the scale that people initially expected.
I mean, it's just the de facto way of doing things
if you're doing computation these days, it seems.
- I for certain, certain folks definitely seem to like it.
We try to respond to feedback
and just build things that people are gonna use.
- Nice, so if you're running JupyterLab
for such a big group, I mean,
there's gotta be crazy amounts of computation
and computer type stuff there.
What does your whole setup look like there?
Like what are you running for your folks
at the research lab?
- So I run JupyterHub instances for like a summer school
and they'll run a workshop and I'll spin up a cluster
for running JupyterHub for doing some physics simulations.
Usually it's for teaching.
So I don't operate hubs for research usually,
I usually operate them for teaching
and then the computation--
- Yeah, so maybe the computation there,
it's like, yeah, not nearly as high
as we're trying to model the universe and--
- Yeah, that's right.
Usually, yeah, often those folks,
the computation are handed off somewhere.
But yeah, like the folks at NERSC in Berkeley
are doing some really exciting stuff
with running JupyterHub on a supercomputer.
- Yeah, cool.
Are you doing like Kubernetes or Docker
or are you just setting up VMs
or how do you handle that side?
- So currently, thanks to the work of the,
all the folks contributing to Zero to JupyterHub,
deploying JupyterHub with Kubernetes,
I think is the easiest to deploy and maintain
as long as you have access to a managed Kubernetes.
I still wouldn't recommend
deploying Kubernetes itself to anybody.
- It seems fairly complicated to run and maintain
that side of things, yeah.
- But if you have a turnkey solution,
the one I use the most is GKE,
the Google managed Kubernetes.
And Zero to JupyterHub, let you just step through
and say, give me a cluster and run JupyterHub on it
and then all I really need to do is,
for the workshop is build the user images.
- Nice, very cool.
You also do some stuff with Binder, is that right?
- Yeah, so I help operate Binder.
So mybinder.org is a service built on top of JupyterHub
that takes JupyterHub as a service
for running notebooks on Kubernetes,
in Binder's case, it's running on Kubernetes.
And Binder ties in another Jupyter project
called Repo2Docker that says,
look at a repo, build a Docker image
with the contents of that,
hopefully that can run everything.
So like if it finds--
- Preferably it's got a requirement, yeah, exactly.
It's got something that specifies its dependencies
or something like that.
- Yeah, and there's a bunch of things that we support
and the idea is to automate existing best practices, right?
So find anything that people are already using
to specify environments and then install those
and then build an image.
And then what Binder does is, so I've built an image,
then send that over to JupyterHub to say,
launch a notebook server with that image.
- Right, yeah, you can see like right here
just on the main site, just put it in a GitHub repo
and maybe a branch or a tag or something
and then click go and then it spins up literally
a Jupyter notebook that you can play with.
When people go to GitHub,
they can oftentimes see the Jupyter notebook.
And always, when I first saw them,
like how in the world is GitHub
computing this stuff for me to see, right?
Like I see, I'm like that,
maybe that is like super computationally expensive
and here's the answer and like how do they know
the data and the dependencies?
And the reality is they've just taken
what's stored in the notebook, right?
That is the last run and it's there.
But if you wanna play with it, you can't do that on GitHub,
but you can on mybinder.org, right?
That creates the, it like turns that
into an interactive notebook.
- Yeah, it adds interactivity to the sharing
that you already have with NVV or GitHub.
- Yeah, nice, yeah, very cool project.
I didn't know that much about it,
but I had Tim Head on the show a while ago
on episode 256 to talk about that
and I learned a lot, so yeah, quite neat.
Now let's jump into ZeroMQ.
So, you know, ZeroMQ is not a Python thing,
but it is very good for Python people, right?
It has support for many different languages
and your work primarily has been to work
on making this nice and easy from Python, right?
- Yeah, so ZeroMQ is a C++, a library written in C++
with a C API, which makes using it a little easier.
And it's a very small API, which is part of why
it's usable from so many languages,
that writing bindings for it is relatively easy.
And the idea of ZeroMQ is it's a,
name is a little funny, 'cause it's a,
it comes from the world of, the people who create it
come from the world of message brokers and message queues
and ZeroMQ is a tongue in cheek
and it's not actually a message queue at all.
It's a messaging library where it's just adding
a little bit of a layer of abstraction on the network
in terms of you have some distributed application
where things need to talk to each other
and ZeroMQ is a tool for building that.
And it's this library and then you can write the bindings
for that library so that you can use it
from any of a variety of languages.
And so Brian Granger and I worked on the Python bindings
to use ZeroMQ from Python, which is called PyZMQ.
- Yeah, when I first thought of it,
I imagined it as like a server,
and something like Redis or Celery or something like that
that you start up and then you create queues
or something on it and then like different things
can talk to it.
But I think maybe a better conceptualization of it
might be like Flask, right?
Flask is not a server, but a Flask is a framework
that you can put into your Python app and then run it
and it is the server itself, right?
- Yeah, and so I'd say that ZeroMQ,
the best way to describe it is it's a fancy socket library.
- Yeah.
- So you create sockets and you send messages.
And the sockets talk to other sockets,
you send messages, you receive messages.
And ZeroMQ is all about what abstractions and guarantees
and things it gives around those sockets and messages.
- Yeah.
There seems to be a lot of culture and zen about ZeroMQ.
Like there's a lot of interesting like nomenclature
in the way that they talk about stuff over there.
So they talk about the zero in ZeroMQ
and the philosophy starts with zero.
Zero is for the zero broker, it's brokerless.
Zero latency, zero cost, it's free, zero admin.
You don't have like a server type of thing.
But also to a culture of minimalism
that permeates the project, adding power
by removing complexity rather than exposing
new functionality.
You wanna speak to that just a little bit,
like your experience with that?
- Well, so I can speak to that as someone
who doesn't work on LibZMQ that much,
more somebody who writes bindings for it.
I can speak to that as it's nice that LibZMQ
doesn't change that much.
And that part of the point of,
so ZeroMQ has all these features.
They have, we'll talk a little bit about it in a second.
But so it's structured so there are sockets
and there are different kinds of sockets
that have different behaviors for building
these different kinds of distributed applications.
But in terms of the API, there's just one.
Like a socket has an API.
All sockets have the same API.
So from the standpoint of writing bindings to a library,
I just need to say, I know how to wrap the socket APIs.
And then as they add new types,
those are just constants that I need to handle.
So I don't need to, oh, there's a new kind of socket.
I need to implement a new Python class
for that new kind of socket.
I just need to wrap socket.
So that's really, that's from my perspective
in terms of as new features are developed
and things in LibZMQ.
From my perspective as a binding developer,
binding maintainer, that's really nice.
But it also, that also extends to the application layer
that once you have a socket and you understand sockets,
changing the type of socket changes your message pattern.
It doesn't change anything about the APIs you need
to use and things like that.
- Yeah, so maybe we could talk a little bit
about what the application model,
I don't necessarily get into programming yet,
but like the application model, right?
So we've got contexts, we've got sockets
and we've got messages.
And those are the basic building blocks
of what working with this is like.
So if I wanted to create something that could,
maybe other applications could talk to it
and exchange data, one of my options might be
to create a RESTful API that exchanges JSON, right?
- Yeah, sure.
- There's a lot of challenges with that.
One, it's sort of send request only, right?
I send over my JSON and then it gives me a response,
but I can't subscribe to future changes, right?
I gotta do something like web sockets in that world
if I want something like that,
which I guess might be closer to this.
And then also it's doing the text conversion.
It's probably a little bit slower.
You gotta do maybe extra work for async, right?
So there's a lot of things that are maybe similar,
but extra patterns, right?
So instead of just request response,
you might have pub sub, you might have like multicast,
like something comes in and everyone gets notified about it.
Can you talk about some of those differences,
like maybe compare it to what other more common APIs
people might know about?
- Yeah, so the main thing that distinguishes ZRMQ
is that you have, so a context is kind of
an implementation detail that you shouldn't
need to care about, but you still need to create.
Sockets are the main thing that you deal with
and you create a socket and every socket has a type.
And that type determines the messaging pattern.
So that means that's where we're getting at
these kind of protocols and messaging patterns.
So with a web server, that's usually
a request reply pattern.
So you have clients connect, send a request,
and then they get a reply.
A pub sub system might be some totally different thing,
maybe in web server land, maybe it's a server side events,
you know, an event stream connection.
And with ZRMQ, the difference between those
is the socket type.
So if you're creating a publish subscribe relationship,
you create a publish socket on one side
and you create a subscribe socket on the other side.
If you're doing a request reply,
you use a socket called a dealer and a router.
There's a request and a reply socket in ZRMQ,
but nobody should ever use them.
They're just a special case of router dealer.
And then there's another one called a,
pattern called like a ventilator and sink.
So that's like what you'd use in a work queue,
for instance, where you've got a source of work
and then it sends a message to one destination,
but you don't necessarily care which one.
- I see, so maybe you're trying to do scaled out computing.
- Yeah, exactly.
- You've got 10 machines that could all do the work
and you want to somehow evenly distribute that work, right?
So you're like, all right, well,
we're just going to throw it at ZRMQ.
All the things that are available to do work can subscribe.
If they need to, they could even like drop out
after doing some work,
but then not receive any more potentially.
- Yeah, exactly.
So that's what ZRMQ,
one of the main things that ZRMQ does is it,
it takes control over those things like multiple peers
and connection events and stuff like that.
Because take the, for example, the publish subscribe,
there's two key,
the things to think about with ZRMQ are,
what happens when you've got more than one peer connected?
- Right.
- And, or what happens when you've got nobody sent to?
So in the publish subscribe model,
what it does is when you send a message on a socket,
it will send, it will immediately send that message
to everybody who's connected and ready.
So if somebody is not able to keep up, right,
there's like a queue that's building up
and it's gotten full, it'll just drop,
stop, drop messages to that peer until they catch up.
If there are no peers, then it's really fast
'cause it just doesn't send anything
and just delete them.
So when you're thinking of ZRMQ from Python,
sending messages is really,
the other thing about it is that it's asynchronous,
that send is not actually,
send doesn't return when the message is on the TCP buffer
or whatever, send returns when you have handed control
of the message to the ZRMQ IO thread.
And this is why ZRMQ has this concept of context.
Contexts are what own the IO threads
that actually do all the real work
of talking to over the network.
So when you're sending in PyZMQ,
you're really just passing ownership of the memory to ZRMQ
and it returns immediately.
And so you don't actually know
when that message is finally sent.
And you shouldn't care.
Sometimes you do care and it can get complicated.
But ZRMQ tries to make you not care.
- Interesting.
So basically you set up the relationships
between the clients and the server
through these different models.
And then you drop off the messages to ZRMQ
and it deals from there, right?
It figures out who gets what and when.
And so your application,
as soon as it gets the message passed off
to the ZRMQ layer, it can go about doing other stuff, right?
- Right, exactly.
So ZRMQ, because it's a C++ library,
it's not gonna grab the GIL or anything.
So it's a true, even if you're using Python,
it's a true multi-threaded application,
even if you're only using one Python thread.
- Yeah. - Because you hand
that memory off to C++, which is running in the background.
You can do some GIT holding intense operation
and ZRMQ will be happily dealing with all the network stuff.
- Right, right.
It's got its own C++ thread,
which has nothing to do with the GIL
and they go do its own thing, right?
- Right. - Nice.
- It can, there is something that comes up in PyZMQ
where it can come back and try to grab the GIL
from the IO thread, or it used to, it doesn't anymore,
because Python does actually need to know
when it let go of that memory
in order to avoid false.
But that's an implementation to do.
- Right, right, okay, cool.
So is there anything about reliable messaging here
where you could say, I wanna make sure
that this message gets delivered to every client?
Like if you said, for example, in this Pub/Sub,
if someone fall behind, it can just drop the messages.
Is there a way to say, pile that up
and then send it along when it catches up or whatever?
- Yeah, so the ZRMQ perspective
is that that's an application level problem.
So ZRMQ helps you build the messaging there
to not, so that it doesn't crash.
And then, and that's part of why it drops messages.
And then it basically, it's up to you to say,
you know, if you're sending messages
and there's a generation counter, for instance,
and you notice, I got message five
and then I got message eight,
it's up to your application to say,
okay, keep a recent history buffer
so that folks can come back with a different pattern,
a request reply pattern to say,
give me a batch of recent messages that I missed
so that I can resume.
But ZRMQ doesn't help you with that.
- Yeah, okay.
But it handles all the networking stuff,
so you don't have to worry about that.
You just have to worry about like,
how do we set up a way to ask again
or have the application ask it once more?
Yeah, nice.
David out there on the live stream asks,
what alternatives to ZRMQ could have been used
to build the Jupyter protocol?
So maybe before we, thanks for the question.
Before we get to that though,
maybe let's just talk about like,
oh wait, ZRMQ is used to build the Jupyter protocol?
- Yeah, yeah.
So the Jupyter protocol,
which essentially started out in IPython parallel.
So we had this interactive parallel computing
networking framework that eventually evolved into,
wait, we've got this network protocol
for remote computation.
We can build basically a REPL protocol,
an interactive shell protocol.
And that ultimately became the Jupyter protocol,
which was built with this kind of ZRMQ mindset of,
I wanna be able to have multiple front ends
at the same time.
So let's say, and we had in 2010, I think,
Fernando and Brian had a working prototype
of real-time collaboration on a terminal.
So you've got, using this protocol,
so you've got two people at the terminal,
you're typing, you can run code
and you can see each other's output.
So we built the Jupyter protocol
with multiple connections in mind.
So that means there's this request reply socket.
So the front end sends a request to please run this code
and the backend sends a reply saying, I ran that,
here's the result.
And there's another channel called IOPub
where we publish output.
So when you do a print statement
or you display a Matplotlib figure,
that's a message that goes on a Pub/Sub channel,
which means that every connected front end,
so you could have multiple JupyterLab instances,
they'll all receive the same message.
- Right, I mean, that sounds like the perfect example
of Pub/Sub.
Somebody's making a change,
somebody has triggered the server to make a change,
but it doesn't matter who started that change,
everybody looking at it wants to see the output, right?
- Right.
And so to answer the question of,
and this becomes particularly important
in the design of IPython parallel,
but getting to the question of what alternatives
to ZRMQ could have been used for the Jupyter protocol.
So when we were designing it,
we thought this protocol of talking directly to kernels
was gonna be the main thing.
It turns out that the main way in 2020 or 2021,
I guess we're in now,
most kernels talk one-to-one with a notebook web server,
and it's the web server that's the one
that's actually spanning out to multiple clients.
With that being the case,
if we had required the notebook server
to be the place where we do all the multiplexing
and everything, we could have actually built
the lower level Jupyter protocol on something much simpler,
just an HTTP rest and event stream
probably could have worked just fine.
- Right, maybe just use web sockets
or something on the web server side.
- Yeah, if web sockets had existed at the time.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure.
Yeah, I mean, that's just a year's easy.
Yeah, so much of that stuff's easier now,
and the browser support it and so on.
So yeah, super interesting.
Now, one thing that that makes me think of is,
how much, how close are we to some sort of
Google Docs JupyterLab type of thing?
I mean, we're not there, right?
I know there's SageMath and there's Google Colab.
There's other systems where this does exist,
where there's sort of, we can all type on the notebook,
same cell, same time type of thing.
Is there anything like that, JupyterLab,
that I just didn't miss, or I missed?
- So there've been, I think, three prototypes at this point
that have been developed and are,
and ultimately not finished for various reasons.
There's another one that's picking up again
and going strong using Yjs,
working with QuantStack, I believe.
- Okay. - So, hopefully soon.
That's not an area of the project
where I've done a lot of work.
I helped a little bit with the last one.
- Well, I mean, to me it sounds like
that's just all JavaScript front-end craziness,
and not a whole lot of other stuff, right?
- Yeah, the state probably lives on the server,
so you need to have a server,
whether it's running CRDT or whatever,
to synchronize the state.
- And the Pub/Sub, yeah, as well, for the changes, yeah.
Going down the rabbit hole for a minute,
I'll also, Noah asked an interesting question about 0MQ.
What's the story with 0MQ and microservices, right?
Like, when I think microservices,
people often set up a whole bunch of little small flask
or FastAPI things that talk JSON exchange request response,
but man, like the performance and the multiplexing,
all those types of things,
sound like it actually could be a really awesome
non-HTTP-based microservice.
- Yeah, I think 0MQ is a really good fit
for microservice-based distributed applications,
because one of the things you do
when you're designing with microservices
is you're defining the communication relationship
and your scaling axes,
and a nice thing to do with 0MQ is to say,
that your application doesn't change
when you've got a bunch of peers.
Your application doesn't even need to know
when a new peer comes and goes, 'cause 0MQ handles that.
So one of the things that's nifty about,
that's weird and magical, but also really useful
about 0MQ is it abstracts binding
and connecting and transports.
So you can have the same application
with the same connection pattern,
and maybe this one binds,
and maybe one side binds and one side connects.
So pub binds and sub connects,
but you can also have sub bind and pub connect.
You can also have pub, your pub bind once
and connect three times,
and none of that changes how your application behaves.
It just changes where the connections go.
- Right.
So with microservices, when you're doing HTTP requests,
you always gotta figure out,
"Okay, well, what's the URL I'm going to?"
And sometimes that even gets real tricky
with what is even the URL of the identity server?
What is the URL of the thing that manages the catalog
before I even request it?
And then usually that's a single endpoint
HTTP request type of thing,
if it's like an update notification.
So yeah, I can imagine that there's some real
interesting things here.
The other thing is-- - Yes, we might--
- Sorry, go ahead.
No, go ahead.
- Yeah, so you can have, in a distributed work
kind of situation, you can have one or a few sources of work
and then you have an elastic number of workers
that just connect and start receiving messages.
And the way this is in kind of the push-pull pattern.
So pub-sub is always send them,
every message you send, send it to everybody connected
who can receive a message.
Whereas push-pull is whenever you send a message,
send it to exactly one peer, and I don't care which one.
And so if more peers are connected,
it will load balance across all those peers.
But if only one's connected,
it will just keep sending to that one.
And at no point in the sender,
do you ever need to know how many,
you never get notified that peers are connecting.
You never need to know that there are any peers,
that there's one peer, that there's a thousand peers.
It doesn't matter.
So then it's in your distributed application to say,
this one's sending with this push-pull pattern,
ventilator sync pattern,
and then I just elastically grow my number of workers
and shut them down and they just connect and close,
disconnect and everything, and it just works.
- Interesting.
Okay, so follow up question from Nawa,
that makes me think.
So he asked, he, she, sorry,
asked whether it is a good idea
to replace REST communication with CRMQ.
And so that leads me to wonder,
you talked about, you send the message
and it's sort of fire and forget style,
like message sent, success.
But so often what I wanna do is,
I need to know what products are offered on sale right now
from the sale microservice or whatever.
I need to get the answer back,
these three products, thank you.
You know what I mean?
How do I, how would I implement something like that
where I send a message but I want the answer?
- Yeah, so that's the request reply pattern.
So you would use either the request reply sockets
or the router dealer sockets for that kind of pattern.
And that's, you send a message.
So in that case, this does have multi-peer semantics,
but usually the requester is connected to one endpoint.
It can be connected to several,
in which case it'll load balance its requests.
And the router, so the receiver side, handles requests
and each request comes in with a message prefix
that identifies who that message came from.
And then it can send replies using that identity prefix
and it will go to whoever sent that request.
And that's how most of the Jupyter protocol
is a request reply pattern.
- Yeah, sure, yeah, I guess that makes sense
'cause you want the answer from the computation or whatever.
You want to know that it's done and so on.
Interesting, okay, yeah, well, that's pretty neat.
The other thing that comes to mind around this
is serialization.
So when I'm doing microservices, I make JSON documents.
I know what things go in JSON, right?
Like fundamental type, strings, integers, and so on.
Surprisingly, dates and times can't go into JSON.
That blow, I still, like, this is 2021.
We can't come up with a text representation
of what time it is.
Anyway, so that's a bit of a pain.
It seems to me like you might be able to exchange
more data more efficiently using a binary.
And it's not even going over the HTTP layer, right?
It's going literally over a TCP socket.
- Yeah, or IPC with BST sockets or UDP.
- Even lower level than that, yeah.
Not even touching the network stack, right?
So, yeah, this gets us to the last piece of XeromQ
that we haven't talked about yet,
and that's what is a message?
So one of the other nice things,
if you've worked with a lower level socket library,
just talking TCP sockets,
you know you have to deal with chunks
and then figure out when you're done
with your message protocol.
Like if you've ever written an HTTP server,
you know you need to find those double blank lines
and all that stuff before you know that you have a request
that you can hand off to your request handler.
- Right, right, you're doing a whole lot of funky,
like parsing the header, okay?
The header it says it's the next 100 bytes
of the thing that I'm getting,
and this one is an int, so I'm gonna parse,
like it's gnarly stuff.
I've worked on projects where we did that,
and it's super fast, but boy, it's low level business.
- Yeah, and that's what, so that's what something
like Flask does for you, right?
It implements the HTTP protocol and then says,
okay, here's a request, please send a reply.
And it helps you construct that reply message.
So ZMQ or PyZMQ live at that level of Flask
where a message is a, not one binary blob,
but a collection of binary blobs.
And ZMQ always delivers whole messages,
so it's atomic and it's asynchronous in its messaging,
which means you will never get part of a message.
There's no like, okay, I got the first third
of this message, keep it in my own buffer
until I get to the end.
A ZMQ socket does not become readable
until an entire message is ready to be read.
- Right, and there may be buffering down
the C++ layer, but it's not gonna tell you
I've received a thing until it's fully baked.
- Right, yeah, all that stuff still happens.
It's just ZMQ takes care of that,
and then when at the PyZMQ level,
or at the ZMQ API level, when you receive with a socket,
or in PyZMQ you say receive multi-part,
you get a list of blobs of memory.
And so if you're talking about serialization with JSON,
so PyZMQ has a helper function called sendJSON,
and it's literally just JSON.dumps thing,
and then send it.
With a little, ensuring UTF-8 bytes, I think.
- Yeah, yeah, nice.
- So PyZMQ, and this is really,
turned out to be really important for,
more important for IPython parallel
than it turned out to be for the Jupyter protocol.
- I'm not familiar with IPython parallel.
Tell me about this.
- So IPython parallel is,
so if you're aware of the Jupyter protocol,
it's a network protocol for,
I've got somewhere over the network
where I wanna run code,
and I have this protocol for sending messages,
please run this code, give me a return output,
show me display stuff.
IPython parallel is a kind of weird
parallel computing library based on the fact that,
so I've got a network protocol to talk to,
to run code remotely.
Why don't I just wrap that in a little bit
to talk to N remote places?
- Maybe partition up the work across them
or something like that.
- Yeah, exactly.
And the fun thing about ZMQ is that
in a Jupyter notebook, the kernel is the server.
The kernel listens for connections on its various sockets.
And then the notebook server, the web server,
or the QT console or the terminal is a client,
and it connects to those sockets.
IPython parallel, because of this fun stuff about ZMQ
not caring about connection direction or count,
adds a scheduler layer,
and it modifies the kernel,
the IPython kernel that you'd use in a Jupyter notebook,
and the only change it makes is
instead of binding on those sockets,
it connects to a central scheduler.
And the kernel's otherwise identical,
the message protocol's otherwise identical,
but the connection direction is different
because the many to one relationship is different.
There's one controller and many engines
instead of many clients connecting to one kernel.
And then, again, using some of the magic
of the ZMQ routing identities,
there's a multiplexer in PyZMQ
called a monitored queue,
where if you have router sockets,
so a router socket is one where the first,
so we talked about a ZMQ message
is a sequence of blobs of memory.
So it can just be one.
With a router socket, it's always at least two,
because the first part is the routing identity
to tell the underlying ZMQ which peer
should it actually send to.
- Sure, okay.
That's cool, and we don't have to worry about that,
'cause that's down at the low level, right?
But that's what happens.
- Well, you need to know about it in that you need to,
when you get a request,
you need to remember that first part,
so when you send a reply,
the first part of the reply is the ID
that came with the request.
- Got it, got it, so it goes back to the right place.
- Yeah, but you can also use that,
if you know the IDs,
you can send messages to a destination
without being in response to a request, right?
What a router really is,
is a socket that can route messages
based on this identity prefix.
So if you have a bundle of identity prefixes,
then you can send messages to anyone at any time.
And that allows us to build a multiplexing scheduler
that from one client connected to one scheduler,
just send messages,
regular, plain old, XeromQ protocol messages,
but with an identity prefix from the client,
and those will end up at the right kernel
just by the magic of XeromQ routing identity.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- And so this is a substantially different messaging pattern,
so the request reply patterns are all the same,
but the connection patterns are totally different.
And the client and the endpoint
don't need to know about it at all,
we just have this adapter in the middle.
- I feel like to really get the zen of this
and take full advantage,
you've gotta really think about
these messaging patterns and styles a little bit,
'cause they're fairly different than,
this is what I know from web servers.
- Yeah, so the big thing to do with,
if you're getting into XeromQ is to read,
there's something called the guide,
so there'll be a link in the notes,
and if you go to xeromq.org, it'll be prominently linked.
This goes through the different patterns
that XeromQ thinks about, the abstractions in XeromQ,
and the different socket types and what they're for,
and the guide will help you,
and there are examples in many languages, including Python.
- Yeah, this is great, yeah.
- Build little boy example patterns
of here's a publish/subscribe application,
here's a ventilator sync application,
and then it also does things--
- With pictures.
- Yes, yeah, yeah, so that's a really,
that's I think the way to internalize
what are the XeromQ concepts and how do I deal with this.
So when it comes to serialization,
this is really important for IPython Parallel,
and it also comes up if you're in Jupyter
and use the interactive widgets,
if you use the really intense ones
that do like 3D visualization,
interactive 3D visualization in the browser
that sometimes are streaming a lot of data from the kernel.
Because a XeromQ, this combines two things,
one from PyXmq and one from XeromQ itself,
so the XeromQ concept that a message
is actually a collection of frames.
This lets you, and another,
that XeromQ can be zero copy,
and PyXmq supports zero copy,
so anything that supports the Python buffer interface
can be sent without copying,
meaning it's still copied over the network,
but at no point are there any copies in memory.
So you can send 100 megabyte NumPy array
with XeromQ without copying it,
but then you've got to think about,
oh wait, if I send a NumPy array
using the Python buffer interface,
all I got were the bytes.
Where's the D type information?
How do I know this is a 2D array of integers?
Because a message is, in Python language,
is a list of chunk of blobs instead of a single blob,
you can serialize that metadata as a header
and the blob you don't want to copy, the big one, separately.
So you can say, Jason dumps some message metadata
that tells you how to interpret the binary blob,
and then just the binary blob, and you don't copy it.
So then you can send, as one message,
we're not breaking the single message delivery,
you have your metadata that's serialized with message pack.
- It comes as a frame or something like that in the message?
Yeah. - Yeah.
So one frame is your header,
one frame is the data itself.
And we do this in the Jupyter protocol,
that the Jupyter protocol has an arbitrary number
of buffers on the end.
But then there are three frames
that are actually Jason serialized dictionaries.
- Nice, very cool, very cool.
Yeah, looking at the guide here,
it says there's 60 diagrams and 750 examples
in 28 languages.
That's a big cross-product matrix of options in here,
you can also download it as a PDF to take with you,
which, yeah, this looks like a really great place
to get started.
Speaking of getting started,
let's talk about programming with the Python aspect here.
All right, so here we'll use PyZMQ,
and this is a library that you work on as well, yeah?
- Yeah, I maintain PyZMQ.
- Yeah, awesome.
So maybe, it's hard to talk about code,
but just give us a sense of what it's like
to create a server.
Like in Flask, you know, I say app equals Flask,
and then I decorate app.route on a function.
Like, what's the zero MQ Python equivalent of that?
- Yeah, so first you always have to create a context,
and then use that context as a socket method
that creates sockets.
And then you either bind or connect those sockets,
and then you start sending and receiving messages.
So if you're writing a server,
which usually means this is the one that binds.
So you'd create a socket, you'd call socket.bind,
and give it a URL, maybe a TCP URL,
or an IPC URL with a local path.
And then you'd go into a loop saying, you know,
receive a message, handle that message, send a reply.
Or if it's a publisher--
- Yeah, sorry, they often have a while true loop
sort of thing, right?
Just while true, wait for somebody to talk to me.
Or while-- - Yeah, that's a simple version.
Or you could be integrated into async IO,
or tornado, or gevent, or whatever.
- Yeah.
Yeah, one of the fundamental principles of zero MQ
is that it's async all over the place.
What's the async and await story with pyzmq?
Is there any integration there?
- Yeah, so if you do import zmq.asyncio,
instead of, if you do import zmq.asyncio
as zmq, you will have the same thing,
but send and receive are awaitable instead.
- Oh, that's glorious.
Yeah, that's really, really fantastic.
So you should be able to scale that
to handling lots of concurrent exchanges.
Pretty straightforward, right?
- Yeah, and that's how, so taking Jupyter as an example,
again, so the Jupyter notebook uses the tornado framework,
which if you're getting into async IO,
tornado is basically async IO before async IO.
- Right, yeah, it's early days, early take async IO, yeah.
- Yeah, so, and there we use something called a zmq stream,
which is something inspired by tornado's IO stream,
which is their wrapper around a regular socket.
It's like bytes are coming in,
call events when bytes have arrived.
Zmq stream is a tornado thing that says
when you have an on receive method
that passes a callback, it says whenever there's a message,
call this callback with the message after receiving it.
And so that's actually how the IPython kernel
and Jupyter notebook work on the zmq side,
is with these zmq stream objects.
- Yeah, cool.
So the example you talked about is how to create a server,
but the web version would be use request
to do a request.get against the server
to be the client that talks to it.
What's that version in PyZmQ?
- In PyZmQ, a client looks very much like a server,
except instead of bind, you'd call connect.
And you generally--
- And instead of receive, you'd do a send, yeah?
- Yeah, and so in a request reply pattern,
yeah, so wherever you have a receive on the server side,
you have a send on the client side and vice versa.
So in a request reply pattern,
the client is doing send a request
and then receive to get the reply.
In a server, you're doing receive a request
and send the reply.
In Pub/Sub, you're only sending.
On the publisher side and on the sub-subscriber side,
you're only receiving.
- Nice, and the way you set this,
you basically choose these things,
is when you go to the context and you create the socket,
you tell it what kind of pattern you're looking for?
Is that where you specify that?
- Yeah, so zmq has a bunch of constants
that identify socket types.
So you'd use, when you create a socket,
you always have to give it a single argument
that is the socket type.
So it'd be like zmq.pub for a publisher socket,
zmq.sub for a subscriber socket,
router, dealer, push, pull.
That defines the messaging pattern
of the underlying sockets.
- Nice, and yeah, sorry, you also have
some JupyterLab examples,
which I guess we can link to as well,
like some diagrams for that, right?
- Yeah, so the Jupyter protocol has a diagram of,
a diagram that we maybe should redesign.
- Okay, maybe not that far, oh, there we go.
- That shows you basically what happens
when you have one kernel and multiple front ends
connected to it with the different socket types
that we have in the Jupyter protocol.
So the Jupyter kernel has two router sockets
and a pub socket, and a fully featured front end
would have two dealer sockets or request sockets
and a sub socket.
- Wow, how neat.
It's just so much is happening below the scenes.
I think getting your mind around these is really neat,
but basically, zeroMQ is handling so much of this
for everyone, right?
- Yeah, it's handling all the,
so we never care about there's multiple peers connected.
We don't need to deal with that.
We have no connection events.
Some folks working on different issues
that causes headaches for them,
because, so there's some aspects of zeroMQ,
like the not guaranteed pub/sub delivery
is actually kind of a pain,
because in,
because we actually want all of this.
- Yeah, yeah, of course.
Is there any, around a lot of libraries,
there's stuff that adds layers that does stuff,
so like Flask extensions and stuff like that.
Is there an extension that will let you do
reliable messaging that you can plug in on top of this?
- So there are, yeah, so if you look at the zeroMQ guide,
there are different patterns,
some of which are basic uses of sockets,
so there's no reason to build another layer of software
on, in order to implement that,
like a simple ventilator pattern,
but if you're talking about things like reliable messaging,
there are some patterns in the guide,
and they have names,
and so some people have written those protocols
as standalone Python packages that say, like,
implement this scheme on top of zmq
that might have things like message replay,
or election stuff, like if you do Kubernetes things,
they're often leader elections
to allow you to scale and migrate things,
so you can do that with zeroMQ applications, too.
- Yeah, and some of those reliable messaging things
sound amazing, and you go, yeah, that's gonna be great,
but there's other drawbacks to those as well,
like poison messages, like,
I gotta make sure I send this,
but the server, the client can't receive it,
so they crash, so then I try to send it again,
and you're just in these weird loops,
and there's a lot of, they all have their challenges.
- Yeah.
- So another thing that I think would be interesting
to touch on for our conversation,
which we've spent so much time talking
about all the programming patterns and stuff
that I don't know we have as much time,
maybe, as we imagined, but--
- Yeah, that's fine.
- Building PyZMQ for,
basically to wrap this C library, right,
this is, some challenges you've had,
it supports both CPython and PyPI, sorry, PyPy,
yeah, and whatnot, so maybe talk about
some of the ways you did that,
you had to do this in the early days
when there was Python 2 and 3,
there's a lot of stuff going on,
maybe pre-wheels, right?
- Yeah, so a few years pre-wheels,
so with IPython and Jupyter,
our target audience is pretty wide, right,
we have a lot of people in education,
a lot of students, a lot of people on Windows.
- A lot of those people don't even want to be programmers
or care about, like, who wants,
they just want this to work,
why won't this thing install,
I just need to do this for my class or for my project,
it needs to work, right?
- Yeah, and so having a compiled dependency
was a big deal for a lot of people,
and so making binary releases
as widely installable as possible
was really important to us,
and supporting as many Python implementations as possible
was also important to us.
So, PyZenQ was originally written all in Cython,
which is a wonderful library for this,
when you're interfacing with a C library,
especially when you want to do things
with the buffer interface,
so when you have a C object and a Python object
that represent the same memory,
Cython is the best.
- Right.
- And so that's a lot of what we do,
we do a lot of the PyGroCop stuff in PyZenQ.
So, when we were working on this,
wheels didn't exist.
- Wheels being the binary version
that you get from PyPI now.
- Yeah, so if you pip install something like PyZenQ,
it doesn't compile it, right?
You get a wheel, and that just unzips it,
and it's really nice.
But at the time, there were only eggs.
And there was a period of time
when pip was taking over from easy install,
which was eventually wonderful,
but one of the drawbacks was,
during this time when pip was taking over,
there was still no wheels.
And so people had started shifting to pip
because easy install did a lot of things
that people don't like.
But you had to use easy install
if you wanted to get a binary,
which means, effectively, if you're on Windows,
you had to use easy install.
And so we had a really complicated,
there actually used to be a big delay,
might even still be there, in PyZenQ.
No, this is definitely not,
so there was a big delay in PyZenQ
that if you ran setup.py, it would sleep for 10 seconds
and show you a big message that says,
you might want to easy install.
But now we're in a very different world, right?
So even after wheels, it was a couple years
before we had many Linux wheels, right?
There was a while before you were even allowed
to make wheels for Linux.
And now we're at a place where we've got wheels
for ARM Max and ARM Linux
and a bunch of different Linux versions
and Windows and everything.
And it's a really different world
and a lot of things would be different
if we were starting this project now.
- Right, it would be easier
if you started now, probably, right?
- Yeah, it would be a lot easier.
We were getting in on some early stuff.
But one of the wonderful things about Cython
is that if you're writing Cython,
you're really writing C, right?
If you're writing Cython code,
it's generating a C program
that calls the Python C API.
- Right, you write Python with a little typing stuff.
It turns that into C and then compiles that
to machine instructions, right?
Like you're basically projecting C somehow, yeah.
- Yeah, and you're basically writing C
that looks like Python.
But the nice thing about C is that with directives
and things, you can have one file
that actually contains 10 different files
because you can just turn off lines when it's compiling.
And that means that it's much easier
to write Cython code that supported Python.
At the time, we were supporting Python 2.5 through 3.1.
And with a single code base, we had no two to three,
none of that, single code base in 2010
supporting Python 2.5 and Python 3.1
and everything in between.
- Wow, that's quite the accomplishment.
- And the tricks were all dealing with PyZMQ.
We were early adopters of a lot of the Python concepts,
Python 3 concepts of we talk bytes, we don't talk str.
Disambiguate, we use bytes and Unicode everywhere.
- There's not necessarily that many differences
between Python 2 and 3, but you could make them different.
But in a lot of the more modern Python 2,
you could still be much closer to what eventually
became Python 3, yeah?
- Yeah, and so I would say it was either 3.3 or 3.4,
it became the norm to have single code base,
single syntax support 2.7, so drop support for 2.6,
support 2.7 and I think 3.3 or above,
or 3.4 and above, whenever they let you back in.
Because then it became easier.
- Yeah, what's the story with Python 2 now?
Does it still support it?
- Just as of December, right, so Python 2 end of life
was last December.
Python, so PyZMQ dropped support,
the latest release requires Python 3.6 actually.
- Nice, I feel like a lot of people are going to 3.6.
Why did you guys choose 3.6?
Is it f-strings or was it something else?
- It was actually the typing.
- All right.
- So one of the main complaints about PyZMQ
is it's so auto-generated and dynamically defined, right?
'Cause we didn't just target multiple versions of Python,
there's also multiple versions of LibZMQ.
And that means that PyZMQ, what constants are defined
is different depending on what version of LibZMQ is linked,
which meant that a lot of, the way it's written,
a lot of static analysis fails.
So when you're auto-completing based on static analysis,
you know, all the constants don't show up.
And so that was an occasional, you know, folks like,
my auto-complete in PyCharm's not working.
That's why I added the types, was to allow static.
- Oh yeah, that's fantastic.
Does it do anything with like what Typeshed does,
where it's like defining the structure in these stub files?
- Yeah, so there's some type annotations
in the pure Python code, but the most,
the relevant part was the stub files for the compiled.
- Right, right.
Yeah, and if people haven't seen those stub files,
those PYI files, it's a little like a C++ header
thing where it has the definition,
but then somewhere else is the implementation of it.
It's a little funky, but yeah,
it's also useful for adding that in, right?
So you could say, here's the structure,
and we'll make that at runtime dynamically,
but this is what you should think of it as, right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, very cool, very cool.
All right, Manuel, you know, I think we just,
honestly, just scratched the surface.
We could go on and on and on, but at the same time,
I want to be respectful of your time.
So maybe we should wrap it up on the main topic there.
So I'll ask you the two questions on the way out.
So if you're gonna write some code,
if you're gonna work on PyZMQ or something like that,
what editor would you use?
- So my favorite editor of all time is TextMate.
- Okay.
- But for various reasons, I don't use that anymore.
It kind of, it hasn't kept up with activity and things,
and I didn't feel sustainable anyway,
so I haven't used it in a long time.
I've tried pretty much everything,
and I'm in constant search of the next TextMate.
So right now I'm actually using Nova, the new editor.
- I was gonna say, maybe Nova is your next TextMate.
How about that?
Like, I know if I say Visual Studio Code or PyCharm,
people are like, oh yeah,
I'm pretty sure I know what that means.
Nova is pretty new.
Tell folks about it.
- So Nova is a new text editor from Panic,
one of the great Mac developers.
- Oh yeah, I use some of their apps,
like Transmit for working with S3 files.
They're really nice stuff, yeah.
- Yeah, so they do a great job designing things,
and thanks to the recent work
of the language server protocol and stuff,
new editors are able to,
there's a lot more shared infrastructure in editor features,
so it's starting from,
further from zero than it might otherwise be,
but I'm not sure I could recommend it
widely to Python developers.
It's a bit of an early adopter situation.
- It is supposed to have Python support,
but it's not specifically for Python, right?
- Right, yeah, no, it's a general purpose editor,
and the target community is more Mac developers,
Ruby and web stuff.
- Yeah, I feel like it's pretty JavaScript friendly,
and maybe Mac developers as well.
- Yeah, and extensions are written in JavaScript.
I've written a couple extensions
for to use the darker code formatter.
(laughing)
- Very cool.
All right, well, that's quite neat,
and I'm glad to hear that's working out for you.
I've wanted to try it, but I just haven't.
And then notable PyPI packages.
I know you picked two that have some relation
back to this challenge of building binary stuff
and distributing it.
- Yeah, so up until December,
there was exactly one computer in the world
that could build PyZenKey releases.
It was my laptop.
And I finally solved that problem
thanks to two wonderful packages.
One is CI Build Wheel, which is a more generally useful,
if you have compiled Python packages, CI Build Wheel.
It's a wonderful thing for building
and distributing all your wheels
on all kinds of platforms.
So now PyZenKey wheels are all built on GitHub Actions,
and I don't need to do anything,
tag a release, and it all happens magically.
The other one that I wanted to highlight
that probably fewer people know about
that's related to CI Build Wheel,
because when you build a Python package
that has an external dependency,
there's an extra step to say, I built PyZenKey,
I linked it against libzmq over here.
But if somebody else installs that wheel as it is,
it's not gonna work, because it's gonna say,
I don't have libzmq.
So for a long time, there have been Mac,
there's a Mac thing called Delocate
and a Linux one called Audit Wheel
that say, look at the binaries in there
and find them on your system,
bring them in and update the linking
to make sure they load.
So the wonderful thing that I just found
is someone created something called Delve Wheel,
which is Audit Wheel or Delocate, but for Windows.
And I don't understand anything about Windows.
- You go grab the DLLs and all that kind of stuff
that have to be there and put it in the right location.
- Perfect.
- Yeah, and so for a long, long time,
for, yeah, I guess 10 years plus,
PyZenKey built libzmq on Windows as an extension.
So it actually took the XeromQ sources
and then just said, hey, this is a Python extension.
You don't need to worry about the fact
that it's actually a C++ library.
Just pass it to disutils and compile it as an extension.
And there were a lot of issues with that.
He never got good optimized results,
but it worked most of the time, and that was the point.
And it was a wonderful contribution from Brandon Rhodes
that was a huge step in making PyZenKey installable
a lot more of the time was this
bundling libzmq as an extension.
But finally got to the point
where I almost never do that anymore.
- Nice, that's beautiful. - Thanks to Delve Wheel.
So Delve Wheel's my big one.
- Yeah, the CI Build Wheel one.
It makes me happy to see the macOS Apple Silicon
got a little checkbox there.
That's what I'm doing, or recording from on my machine
over here, got the Mac mini one.
And man, that is a sweet device,
but you're a little bit back in like,
oh, we don't have wheels for your system, sorry.
- Yeah, yeah, I have, so I have two Mac Silicon wheels,
one that I just finished last week,
but with CI Build Wheel, that's a universal wheel.
And then I have another Mac Arm wheel targeting
macOS 11 plus basically just for Homebrew Python
on Homebrew Python 3.9 on Arm Macs.
- That's pretty specific, but yes,
that's a thing I have actually.
- Yeah, it's not an insignificant target.
And that one I built on my wife's new laptop.
- Nice, very cool, very cool.
- So that's the only one that's not built on CI yet.
- Right, awesome.
Well, thank you so much for sharing all this stuff.
And of course, all your work.
I feel like I have a lot to go learn,
but it's exciting stuff to be able to think about
new networking, ways of doing stuff
with networking and Python.
So thanks so much for that.
And final call to action,
people want to get started with this stuff,
what would you tell them to do?
- I'd say read the guide.
So if you're interested in ZRMQ,
thinking about building distributed applications
and things, read the ZRMQ guide, the whole thing.
And I think it'll give you some new ideas.
Even if you don't use ZRMQ,
it'll give you some good new ideas for how--
- Yeah, you'll have some ideas about,
right, like these design patterns
that maybe are not so common,
but like Pub/Sub or whatever.
Yeah, awesome.
Well, thanks again for being on the show.
It was great to chat with you.
- Yeah, thanks so much.
- You bet, bye.